Zero-temperature Quantum Monte Carlo Methods in Chemistry and Physics
Cyrus Umrigar
1:30-3:00 Eastern US time (M,W,F):  April 27, 29, May 1, 4, 6, 8

This module will consist of lectures and a hands-on computer lab

Topics will likely include:
Zero-temperature QMC in a nutshell (4 viewgraphs!)
When to use classical or quantum MC?
  Why in the world would one intentionally introduce randomness?
Brief history of Monte Carlo methods
Classical MC techniques useful in QMC
  Central limit theorem
    Recognizing infinite-variance estimators
  Monte Carlo integration
  Importance sampling
    Transforming infinite-variance estimators to finite-variance estimators
  Direct sampling of (simple) distributions
    Transformation method
    Rejection method
  Metropolis-Hastings method
    Choice of optimal proposal probability (requires thought)
    Choice of optimal acceptance probability (straightforward)
Variational Monte Carlo
  Forms of wavefunctions
  Optimization of wavefunctions (trickier than you may think)
    Measures of goodness
    Newton method
    Linear method
Projector Monte Carlo
  Choice of space in which MC walk is performed (both finite and infinite)
  Choices for projector
  Sign-problem in different QMC methods
  Branching random walks
  Population control and how to remove population control bias
  Diffusion Monte Carlo
    Projector without and with importance sampling
    Fixed-node approximation
    Expectation values of observables that do not commute with the Hamiltonian
      Forward walking and side walking
    Techniques for reducing the time-step (Trotter) error
  Methods with no Trotter error in finite spaces
Other QMC methods -- AFQMC, ...

Homeworks and computer labs (Two short ones and one longer one):
1) Transforming infinite-variance estimator to finite-variance estimator
2) Unbiased estimators
3) You will write your own toy program in Python to:
   a) use VMC to compute variational upper bounds for energy of ground state of
      He atom and H^- ion, and first excited state of He atom.
   b) use DMC to compute the exact energies (aside from small statistical and Trotter errors)
      of these systems.

The following two pedagogic articles (included in this github repository) and book have
a strong overlap with the topics I will cover:
1) Introduction to variational and projector Monte Carlo, C. J. Umrigar,
   in Many-Body Methods for Real Materials Modeling and Simulation Vol. 9
   Advances in Quantum Chemistry, ed. Eva Pavarini, Erik Koch and Shiwei Zhang
2) Introduction to the variational and diffusion Monte Carlo methods,
   Julien Toulouse and Roland Assaraf and C. J. Umrigar,
   Advances in Quantum Chemistry (2015)
3) Quantum Monte Carlo Approaches for Correlated Systems, Federico Becca and Sandro Sorella

I will not be talking about finite temperature QMC and for the most part I will not talk
about QMC methods that are used mostly for lattice models.  For these some good references are:
1) Path-integrals in the theory of condensed helium, David M. Ceperley, Rev. Mod. Phys. 67, 279 (1995).
2) Quantum Monte Carlo Methods, Algorithms for lattice models, Gubernatis, Kawashima and Werner
